2. Prerequisites and Package Installation
Ensure your development environment includes Python and Flask. You must be comfortable with standard web technologies (HTML/CSS/JS) and the basic Flask application lifecycle.
Install Flaskwebgui
Execute the following command to install the library via pip:
pip install flaskwebgui
Technology Stack Requirements
Backend: Python, Flask
Frontend: HTML5, CSS3, JavaScript
Packaging: PyInstaller or the author's custom python-pkg tool

3. Step 1: Implement the Frontend Polling Mechanism
To manage the lifecycle of the desktop application, Flaskwebgui uses a "heartbeat" or polling mechanism. This prevents the Python background process from running indefinitely after the UI window is closed.
The Polling Logic
The frontend must make continuous GET requests to a specific middleware endpoint. If these requests stop (indicating the window has been closed), the server automatically triggers a shutdown sequence.
Endpoint: /flaskwebgui-keep-server-alive
Implementation
Insert the following logic into your main template (e.g., templates/index.html or a global layout.html):
Initiate a GET request to the /flaskwebgui-keep-server-alive endpoint.
Set an interval to repeat this request periodically.
Ensure the script loads on every page to maintain the server connection during navigation.

4. Step 2: Backend Implementation (Instantiating FlaskUI)
The primary modification to your Flask application involves wrapping the application instance in the FlaskUI class. This class manages the Chromium window (which launches without an address bar) and handles the server lifecycle.
Transitioning from app.run()
In a standard web app, you use app.run(). For a desktop deployment, replace that logic with the FlaskUI wrapper as shown below:
from flask import Flask
from flaskwebgui import FlaskUI

app = Flask(__name__)

# Define your routes
@app.route("/")
def index():
    return "Hello Desktop!"

if __name__ == "__main__":
    # Instantiate FlaskUI and pass the app instance
    # The server parameter specifies the framework being used
    ui = FlaskUI(app=app, server="flask")
    
    # Start the application
    ui.run()

5. Step 3: Application Architecture and File Structure
To maintain a "write once, deploy anywhere" workflow, adopt a modular file structure. Separating the Flask logic from the GUI entry point allows you to ship the same code as either a standard website or a desktop app.
Recommended Structure
main.py: Contains the core Flask application, route definitions, and business logic.
gui.py: The desktop entry point. It imports the app object from main.py and executes ui.run().
templates/: Directory for HTML files, including the mandatory JS polling script.
static/: Directory for CSS, JS, and image assets.
By using gui.py as a dedicated wrapper, you keep your main.py clean for potential web deployment.

6. Step 4: Packaging and Distribution
Once the application is stable, choose a packaging method based on your target OS and source code requirements.
Feature
PyInstaller
Author's "python-pkg" Tool
OS Support
Windows, Linux, macOS (Cross-platform)
Windows Only
Format
Static Executable (.exe)
Portable Python Folder
Source Access
Bundled/Compiled
Access to source code post-packaging
Modification
Requires full repackaging to update
Allows direct script modification
Best Use Case
General distribution
Windows internal tools requiring quick updates
The "python" Packaging Advantage
The custom python-pkg tool utilizes a portable, embedded version of Python. Unlike PyInstaller, which bundles everything into a static binary, this tool ships the interpreter alongside your script. This allows you to modify the source code directly in the distribution folder without needing to run the packaging process again. It also supports custom icons and automatic background downloads of the embedded Python instance.

7. Troubleshooting and Design Considerations
To ensure the application provides a professional, "native" experience rather than looking like a browser window, follow these guidelines:
UI Components: Use a CSS framework like Metro 4 to implement Windows-native UI components (buttons, menus, tiles).
Window Management: Ensure FlaskUI is configured correctly so the window launches without an address bar or navigation buttons, mimicking a standard desktop executable.
Data Strategy: Use SQLite for local storage. It is highly efficient for desktop environments and can reliably handle concurrent access for "under 100 users" if hosted on a shared network drive.